     Honey, I Shrunk the Sample Covariance Matrix

      Olivier Ledoit                                  Michael Wolf∗
    Equities Division                     Department of Economics and Business
Credit Suisse First Boston                      Universitat Pompeu Fabra
   One Cabot Square                            Ramon Trias Fargas, 25–27
  London E14 4QJ, UK                             08005 Barcelona, Spain
    olivier@ledoit.net                            michael.wolf@upf.edu

                                      November 2003



                                           Abstract

          The central message of this paper is that nobody should be using the sample
      covariance matrix for the purpose of portfolio optimization. It contains estima-
      tion error of the kind most likely to perturb a mean-variance optimizer. In its
      place, we suggest using the matrix obtained from the sample covariance matrix
      through a transformation called shrinkage. This tends to pull the most extreme
      coefficients towards more central values, thereby systematically reducing estima-
      tion error where it matters most. Statistically, the challenge is to know the optimal
      shrinkage intensity, and we give the formula for that. Without changing any other
      step in the portfolio optimization process, we show on actual stock market data
      that shrinkage reduces tracking error relative to a benchmark index, and substan-
      tially increases the realized information ratio of the active portfolio manager.




∗
    Phone: +34-93-542 2552, Fax: +34-93-542 1746



                                               1
1     Introduction

Since the seminal work of Markowitz (1952), mean-variance optimization has been the
most rigorous way to pick stocks in which to invest. The two fundamental ingredients
are the expected (excess) return for each stock, which represents the portfolio manager’s
ability to forecast future price movements, and the covariance matrix of stock returns,
which represents risk control. To further specify the problem, in the real world most
asset managers are forbidden from selling any stock short, and in the modern world they
are typically measured against the benchmark of an equity market index with fixed (or
infrequently rebalanced) weights. Fast and accurate quadratic optimization softwares
exist that can solve this problem — provided they are fed the right inputs, that is.

    Estimating the covariance matrix of stock returns has always been one of the stickiest
points. The standard statistical method is to gather a history of past stock returns and
compute their sample covariance matrix. Unfortunately this creates problems that are
well documented (Jobson and Korkie, 1980). To put it as simply as possible, when
the number of stocks under consideration is large, especially relative to the number of
historical return observations available (which is the usual case), the sample covariance
matrix is estimated with a lot of error. It implies that the most extreme coefficients in the
matrix thus estimated tend to take on extreme values not because this is “the truth”,
but because they contain an extreme amount of error. Invariably the mean-variance
optimization software will latch onto them and place its biggest bets on those coefficients
which are the most extremely unreliable. Michaud (1989) calls this phenomenon “error-
maximization”. It implies that managers’ realized track records will underrepresent their
true stock-picking abilities, which is clearly the last thing they want.

    On the back of this, some companies such as APT and BARRA have proposed pro-
prietary methods to generate covariance matrices that are advertized as better suited to
mean-variance optimization than the sample covariance matrix. The drawbacks are that
any manager using them establishes a costly and indefinite dependence on an external
entity who does not share in any downside risk, and that their proprietary methods are
not open for independent inspection and verification, so one can never be sure what is
really going on behind the curtain.

    This is why we propose a new formula for estimating the covariance matrix of stock
returns that can beneficially replace the sample covariance matrix in any mean-variance
optimization application, and is absolutely free of charge and open to everybody. The
crux of the method is that those estimated coefficients in the sample covariance matrix
that are extremely high tend to contain a lot of positive error and therefore need to be
pulled downwards to compensate for that. Similarly, we compensate for the negative
error that tends to be embedded inside extremely low estimated coefficients by pulling

                                             2
them upwards. We call this the shrinkage of the extremes towards the center. If properly
implemented, this shrinkage would clearly fix the problem of the sample covariance
matrix described above. The key questions are towards what target to shrink, and how
intensely? Our contributions are: (1) to provide a rigorous statistical answer to both
these questions; (2) to describe this below so the reader can decide for him or herself
whether it makes sense; (3) to supply computer code that implements the resulting
mathematical formula; and finally (4) to show that it yields significant improvements on
actual stock return data.

    Shrinkage is hardly a new and revolutionary concept in Statistics, although it cer-
tainly was when first introduced by Professor Charles Stein of Stanford University in
1955. An excellent non-technical primer on shrinkage using real-life examples of base-
ball batting averages was written by Efron and Morris (1977). That this idea has not
yet percolated to a field where it would be most useful, portfolio management, is a
testimony that Chinese walls still exist between theoretical and applied disciplines who
would benefit from talking to each other more. We endeavor to knock down these walls.
Early attempts to use shrinkage in portfolio selection were made by Frost and Savarino
(1986) and Jorion (1986), but their particular shrinkage techniques broke down when
the number of stocks on the menu exceeds the number of historical return observations,
which is very often the case in practice. Recently Jagannathan and Ma (2003) proved
that mean-variance optimizers are already implicitly applying some form of shrinkage to
the sample covariance matrix when short sales are ruled out, and that this is generally
beneficial in terms of improving weights stability. All the more reason then to do it
explicitly so that the optimal shrinkage intensity can be applied, as in our paper. Much
of the foundations for the present work has been laid out by the authors in other papers
(Ledoit and Wolf, 2003, 2004). Those were largely theoretical and general-interest ar-
ticles, whereas the present one focuses specifically on how to employ the technology to
add value to active portfolio management.

   First we give a formal description of the portfolio optimization problem in order to
provide a solid base for our later exposition. Having described our estimator, we then
look at its out-of-sample performance, using historical stock return data.



2    Formal Description of the Problem

We study the most relevant case for equity portfolios. The benchmark is a weighted index
of a large number N of individual stocks, such as a value-weighted index. The universe
of stocks from which the portfolio manager selects includes all these stocks.1 Excess



                                           3
returns are defined relative to the chosen benchmark. Define the following notations:

                wB = vector of benchmark weights for the universe of N stocks
                  x = vector of active weights
     wP = wB + x = vector of portfolio weights
                  y = vector of stock returns
          µ = E(y) = vector of expected stock returns
              0
     α = µ − wB µ = vector of expected stock excess returns
                  Σ = covariance matrix of stock returns


   We can write expected returns and variances in vector/matrix notation as:

                           0
                    µB = w B µ = expected return on benchmark
                        0
                 σB2 = wB ΣwB = variance of benchmark return
                    µP = wP0 µ = expected return on portfolio
                 σP2 = wP0 ΣwP = variance of portfolio return
                      µE = x0 µ = expected excess return on portfolio
                    σE2 = x0 Σx = tracking error variance


    The portfolio selection problem is subject to the constraint that the portfolio be fully
invested, that is, the portfolio weights wP have to add up to unity. With 1 denoting
a conforming vector of ones, this can be written as wP0 1 = 1. Because the benchmark
weights also add up to unity, the vector of portfolio deviations must up to zero, or
x0 1 = 0. Therefore, the portfolio of the manager can be viewed as a position in the
benchmark plus an active portfolio. The active portfolio is a long/short portfolio and
expresses the views of the manager. Two immediate implications are:

                               µP = µ B + µ E
                                              0
                                σP2 = σB2 + 2wB Σx + σE2


    While positions of the active portfolio are both positive and negative, the manager
does not have complete freedom. None of the portfolio weights wP can be negative, or
wP ≥ 0, due to the long-only constraint. The resulting constraint x ≥ −wB expresses
the limited freedom of the manager. Grinold and Kahn (2000, Chapter 15) illustrate how
this limitation can negatively affect the performance of the managed portfolio, especially
when the benchmark is a value-weighted index and when N is large. In addition, the
manager often is faced with the constraint that the total position in any given stock

                                             4
cannot exceed a certain value, like 10%. If this upper bound is denoted by c, the
resulting constraint on the weights of the active portfolio is x ≤ c1 − wB .

   Having defined the various ingredients, we can now formalize the optimization prob-
lem of the manager as follows:2

                                Minimize:    x0 Σx                                     (1)
                                such that:   x0 α ≥ g
                                             x0 1 = 0
                                             x ≥ −wB
                                             x ≤ c1 − wB

Here g is the manager’s target gain (i.e., expected excess return) relative to the bench-
mark. A typical number is 300 basis points (annualized). The manager chooses g and
the upper limit c and also knows the current vector of benchmark weights wB . She is
now left to provide estimates for α, the vector of expected stock excess returns, and
for Σ, the covariance matrix of stock returns. In a final step, all the inputs are fed into
a quadratic optimization software that will compute x, the optimal weights of the active
portfolio. It is our mission to provide the manager with a good estimator of Σ. We do
not help with the problem of how to estimate α.



3     Shrinkage Estimator of the Covariance Matrix

3.1    Shrinkage Principle

This section briefly describes the shrinkage estimator for Σ which we propose; for a more
detailed exposition and relevant historical background the reader is referred to Ledoit
and Wolf (2003). We start with the sample covariance matrix S. Its advantages are
ease of computation and the property of being unbiased (i.e., its expected value is equal
to the true covariance matrix). Its main disadvantage is the fact that it contains a lot
of estimation error when the number of data points is of comparable or even smaller
order than the number of individual stocks; this is the common situation in financial
applications. Alternatively, one might consider an estimator with a lot of structure,
as the single-factor model of Sharpe (1963). Such estimators contain relatively little
estimation error but, on the other hand, tend to be misspecified and can be severely
biased. In one way or another, all successful risk models find a compromise between the
sample covariance matrix and a highly structured estimator.

    The industry standard are multi-factor models. The idea is to incorporate multiple

                                             5
factors instead of just the single factor of Sharpe (1963). Thereby the models become
more flexible and their bias is reduced. But the estimation error increases. Finding the
optimal tradeoff by deciding on the nature and the number of the factors included in
the model is as much an art as it is a science. One approach is to use a combination
of industry factors and risk indices, with the total number of factors being on the order
of 50. An example is BARRA’s U.S. Equity model. Another approach is to use statistical
factors, such as principal components, with the total number of factors being on the order
of 5. A commercial vendor offering risk models based on statistical factors is APT.

    Our philosophy is different. Consider the sample covariance matrix S and a highly
structured estimator, denoted by F . We find a compromise between the two by com-
puting a convex linear combination δF + (1 − δ)S, where δ is a number between 0 and 1.
This technique is called shrinkage, since the sample covariance matrix is ‘shrunk’ to-
wards the structured estimator. The number δ is referred to as the shrinkage constant.3
Intuitively, it measures the weight that is given to the structured estimator. Shrinkage
estimators have a long and successful history in statistics. The beauty of the principle
is that by properly combining two ‘extreme’ estimators one can obtain a ‘compromise’
estimator that performs better than either extreme. To make a somewhat sloppy anal-
ogy: most people would be prefer the ‘compromise’ of one bottle of Bordeaux and one
steak to either ‘extreme’ of two bottles of Bordeaux (and no steak) or two steaks (and
no Bordeaux).

    Any shrinkage estimator has three ingredients: An estimator with no structure,
an estimator with a lot of structure, and a shrinkage constant. The estimator without
structure is generally quite obvious, given the context. For us it is the sample covariance
matrix. Less obvious are the choice of the structured estimator, or shrinkage target, and
the shrinkage constant.


3.2    Shrinkage Target

The shrinkage target should fulfill two requirements at the same time: it involves only a
small number of free parameters (that is, a lot of structure) but it also reflects important
characteristics of the unknown quantity being estimated. Ledoit and Wolf (2003) suggest
the single-factor matrix of Sharpe (1963) as the shrinkage target. In this paper we make
a different suggestion: the constant correlation model. In our experience, it gives com-
parable performance but is easier to implement. The model says that all the (pairwise)
correlations are identical.4 The estimation of the model is straightforward. The average
of all the sample correlations is the estimator of the common constant correlation. This
number together with the vector of sample variances implies our shrinkage target, de-
noted by F in the remainder of the paper. A formal description of the shrinkage target

                                             6
is provided in Appendix A; in particular, see equation (3).


3.3    Shrinkage Constant

The obvious practical problem is which value to choose for the shrinkage constant. Any
choice of δ strictly between 0 and 1 would yield a compromise between S and F . But
this results in infinitely many possibilities. Intuitively, there is an ‘optimal’ shrinkage
constant. It is the one that minimizes the expected distance between the shrinkage
estimator and the true covariance matrix. Call this number δ ∗ . Appendix B derives
a formula for estimating δ ∗ . The estimated optimal shrinkage constant is denoted δ̂ ∗ ;
see equation (5) in Appendix B. Our operational shrinkage estimator of the covariance
matrix Σ is now ready for use5 :

                               Σ̂Shrink = δ̂ ∗ F + (1 − δ̂ ∗ )S                        (2)



4     Empirical Study

We now study the out-of-sample performance of our shrinkage estimator, using historical
stock market data. DataStream provides monthly U.S. stock data. We use these data
to construct several value-weighted indices to serve as our benchmarks. Starting in
February 1983, the methodology is as follows. At the beginning of each month, we
select the N largest stocks as measured by their market value. The market values of
the stocks define their index weight. At the end of the month, we observe the (real)
returns of the individual stocks and, given their weights, compute the return on the
index. This prescription is repeated every month until the end of December 2002. Thus,
the constituents list and the index weights are constantly updated.

   As far as the benchmark size N is concerned, we employ N = 30, 50, 100, 225, 500.
This range covers such important benchmarks as DJIA, Xetra DAX, DJ STOXX 50,
FTSE 100, NASDAQ-100, NIKKEI 225, and S&P 500. Summary statistics of the various
benchmark returns are provided in Table 1.

    To mimic a skilled active manager, we first construct raw forecasts of the expected
excess returns by adding random noise to the realized excess returns. In a second
step, these raw forecasts are transformed into refined forecasts α̂ which are fed to the
quadratic optimizer. This is done in a way such that the unconstrained annualized ex
ante information ratio (IR) is approximately equal to 1.5, independently of the value of
the benchmark size N . The unconstrained IR could be attained by a manager who did
not face any lower or upper bound constraints on the weight vector x and who knew

                                              7
the exact nature of the covariance matrix Σ of stock returns. The details of the forecast
construction are described in Appendix C.

   A risk model is evaluated by its out-of-sample performance.

Evaluation Algorithm:

   • At the beginning of each month feed the following ingredients to the quadratic
     optimizer: the benchmark weights wB , the forecasted expected excess returns α̂,
     the estimated covariance matrix Σ̂, the desired gain g, and an upper bound of
     c = 0.1 on the total weight of any stock.

   • To compute an estimate Σ̂, we use the last T = 60 monthly returns of the current
     constituents list of stocks.

   • The quadratic optimizer computes a weight vector x.

   • At the end of the month, the realized excess return is given by e = x0 y, where y is
     the vector of stock returns for the month.

   • The out-of-sample period ranges from 02/1983 until 12/2002, so a total of 239
     monthly realized excess returns are obtained.

   • From the excess returns we compute the (annualized) ex post information ratio as
     √
       12ē/se , where ē is the sample average of the excess returns and se is the sample
     standard deviation of the excess returns.

   • Since the results depend on the monthly forecasts α̂, which are random, we repeat
     this process 50 times and then report mean-summary statistics.

   • For the (annualized) gain, we use 300 basis points.

    Apart from our shrinkage estimator, we include the sample covariance matrix, the
shrinkage estimator of Ledoit and Wolf (2003), and a multi-factor risk model based on
statistical factors in our study.

   The sample covariance matrix is widely-known and very easy to compute. Based on
the recent paper by Jagannathan and Ma (2003), a portfolio manager facing a long-only
constraint might hope that it yields reasonable performance.

   Ledoit and Wolf (2003) suggest the single-factor model of Sharpe (1963) as the shrink-
age target, instead of the constant correlation covariance matrix as we do in this paper.

  Multi-factor models are the industry standard for the estimation of the covariance
matrix. Statistical factors, as opposed to macroeconomic and fundamental factors, have

                                            8
the advantage that they can be computed from past stock returns alone.6 The statistical
factors we use are the first five principal components, as in Connor and Korajczyk (1993)
and Connor (1995).

   Mean-summary statistics for the realized excess returns are presented in Table 2.
Comparing the shrinkage estimator proposed in this paper (Shrink-CC) to the sample
covariance matrix (Sample), the results can be highlighted as follows.

   • In all scenarios, the shrinkage estimator yields the highest (average) information
     ratio.

   • In most scenarios, the shrinkage estimator yields the highest (average) mean excess
     return.

   • In all scenarios, the shrinkage estimator yields the lowest (average) standard devi-
     ation of excess return.

   • The (average) information ratio decreases as the benchmark size N increases. 7

    Figure 1 shows boxplots of the realized information ratios for the sample covariance
matrix and the shrinkage estimator proposed in this paper over the 50 repetitions for the
various scenarios. The message is identical to the one of Table 2: (i) shrinkage improves
on the sample covariance matrix; (ii) realized information ratios tend to decrease as N
increases. The plots also show considerable variation in the realized information ratios.
In addition to having good forecasting skill and using a good risk model, the successful
active manager can benefit from a bit of good luck.

   Next, we compare the shrinkage estimator proposed in this paper (Shrink-CC) to the
other methods included in the study. The single-factor shrinkage estimator proposed
by Ledoit and Wolf (2003) is denoted by Shrink-SF and the 5 principal components
covariance matrix estimator is denoted by PC-5. Shrink-CC does somewhat better than
Shrink-SF for N ≤ 100 and is somewhat worse for N ≥ 225. Shrink-CC does somewhat
better than PC-5 for N ≤ 50 and is comparable to PC-5 for N ≥ 100.

    Table 3 presents mean-summary statistics on the average monthly turnover. Turnover
is defined as the total turnover of Grinold and Kahn (2000, Chapter 16) Note that this
definition corresponds to updating the entire portfolio, not just the active portfolio.
A part of the turnover, therefore, is due to the constituents list of the benchmark and
their weights, both of which change over time. In general, the turnover is too high to
be attractive for an active manager. But no effort was made to limit turnover, and a
constraint to this effect could be easily added to the quadratic optimization problem (1).
The important message to take away from Table 3 is that the sample covariance matrix


                                            9
results in the highest turnover always. The other three methods are comparable to one
another.

    We finish this section with two remarks.

Remark 1 Many active managers face further constraints, apart from the long-only
constraint and an upper bound on the weight of any given stock. Examples are market-
cap-neutral constraints, turnover constraints, and dividend-yield neutrality with respect
to the benchmark. Adding further constraints generally reduces the ex post information
ratio; see Clarke et al. (2002). Nevertheless, the manager will still benefit from using a
superior risk model.

Remark 2 It is by now well-understood that tracking-error efficient portfolios are not
mean-variance efficient: The tracking-error efficient frontier is shifted below and to the
right compared to the mean-variance efficient frontier. For example, see Roll (1992),
Wilcox (1994), and Scherer (2002, Chapter 6). Jorion (2003) shows that adding a
constraint on the total portfolio variance, σP2 = wP0 Σwp , to the quadratic optimization
problem (1) improves the mean-variance efficiency of the managed portfolio.8 Obviously,
the additional constraint requires an estimate of Σ in practice and therefore a superior
risk model will again be beneficial to the manager.



5     Conclusion

This paper proposes a risk model that dominates the traditional one, the sample co-
variance matrix, for the purpose of mean-variance optimization in the context of active
portfolio management. We claim that, given the well-documented flaws of the sample
covariance matrix, nobody should be using it anymore now that an enhanced alternative
is available. Using the simple modification we propose substantially increases the real-
ized information ratio of the portfolio manager. For example, when an annual expected
excess return of 300 basis points over the benchmark is specified, a typical increase is on
the order of 50%. Computer code in the Matlab programming language implementing
this improved estimator is freely downloadable from http://www.ledoit.net. Portfolio
management firms that are sophisticated enough to employ a mean-variance optimiza-
tion software would have the expertise required to implement our simple formulas in
any computer language. All types of portfolio optimization procedures, even advanced
ones such as the resampled efficient frontier9 , would benefit from shrinking the sample
covariance matrix. The intuitive justification for this statistical transformation is pru-
dence: not betting the ranch on noisy coefficients that are too extreme. We hope that
the profession can find value in our proposal.

                                            10
Notes
   1
    The problem can be generalized to the setting where the universe contains further
stocks not contained in the benchmark. However, to keep transaction costs down, the
more general setting is of limited practical interest.
   2
    Jorion (2003) considers the problem of maximizing x0 α subject to an upper bound
on the tracking error variance x0 Σx. Grinold and Kahn (2000) consider the problem
of maximizing x0 α − λ x0 Σx, where λ is a risk-aversion constant. These are equivalent
problem formulations, leading to the same frontier in risk-return space.
   3
   Ledoit and Wolf (2003) denote the shrinkage constant by α. We switch to the
symbol δ in this paper to avoid confusion with expected excess returns.
   4
     The constant correlation model would not be appropriate if the assets came from
different asset classes, such as stocks and bonds. But in such cases more general models
for the shrinkage target are available.
   5
     An additional advantage of our srhinkage estimator is that it is always positive defi-
nite. When the size of the benchmark N exceeds the number of past returns used in the
estimation process, the sample covariance matrix S is singular. This would imply that
threre exist stock portfolios with zero risk. On the other hand, our shinkage estimator is
a convex combination of an estimator that is positive definite (the shrinkage target F )
and an estimator that is positive semi-definite (the sample covariance matrix S). It is
therefore positive definite.
   6
    Nevertheless, multi-factor models based on statistical factors require more program-
ming effort than our shrinkage estimator. First, one needs software to extract the factors,
such as principal components, from the data. Second, various time series regressions have
to be run to estimate the factor loadings, residual variances, etc.. Third, the various
pieces have to be put together to arrive at the estimator of the covariance matrix.
   7
    Grinold and Kahn (2000, Chapter 15) explain why this happens. In case N is very
large, a manager is probably ill-advised to actively invest in all the stocks making up
the index. The realized information ration can be improved by, for example, focusing on
the 50 or 100 largest stocks in the index and setting the weights of the remaining ones
equal to zero.
   8
       A related idea already appears in Wilcox (1994).
   9
    Future research will focus on the effectiveness of resampling methods in the spirit
of Michaud (1998), either by themselves or combined with shrinkage, compared to the
shrinkage method proposed in this paper.



                                            11
A     Formula for Shrinkage Target

Some notation is needed. Let yit , 1 ≤ i ≤ N, 1 ≤ t ≤ T , denote the return on stock i
during period t. Our analysis assumes that stock returns are independent and identically
distributed (iid) over time and have finite fourth moments. The sample average of the
returns of stock i is given by ȳi· = T −1 Tt=1 yit . Let Σ denote the population (or true)
                                          P

covariance matrix and let S denote the sample covariance matrix. Typical entries of the
matrices Σ and S are denoted by σij and sij , respectively.

    The population and sample correlations between the returns on stocks i and j are
given by
                              σij                       sij
                      %ij = √           and     rij = √
                              σii σjj                   sii sjj
The average population and sample correlations are given by
                         N −1 XN                                     N −1 XN
                    2    X                                      2    X
           %̄ =                    %ij      and        r̄ =                    rij
                (N − 1)N i=1 j=i+1                          (N − 1)N i=1 j=i+1

Define the population constant correlation matrix Φ by means of the population vari-
ances and the average population correlation:
                                                            √
                           φii = σii     and        φij = %̄ σii σjj

Correspondingly, define the sample constant correlation matrix F by means of the sample
variances and the average sample correlation:
                                                            √
                           fii = sii     and        fij = r̄ sii sjj                    (3)

This matrix F is the shrinkage target introduced in Subsection 3.2.



B     Formula for Shrinkage Intensity

We have to choose the objective according to which the shrinkage intensity δ is optimal.
All existing shrinkage estimators from finite-sample statistical decision theory and also
the one of Frost and Savarino (1986) break down when N ≥ T because their loss functions
involve the inverse of the covariance matrix. Instead, we propose a loss function that
does not depend on this inverse and is very intuitive: it is a quadratic measure of distance
between the true and the estimated covariance matrices based on the Frobenius norm.
The Frobenius norm of the N × N symmetric matrix Z with entries (zij )i,j=1,...,N is


                                               12
defined by
                                                N X
                                                X N
                                          2
                                        kZk =             zij2
                                                i=1 j=1

By considering the Frobenius norm of the difference between the shrinkage estimator
and the true covariance matrix, we arrive at the following quadratic loss function:

                                 L(δ) = kδ F + (1 − δ) S − Σk2


    The goal is to find the shrinkage constant δ which minimizes the expected value of
this loss, that is, the risk:

                          R(δ) = E(L(δ)) = E kδ F + (1 − δ) S − Σk2
                                                                           
                                                                                              (4)

Under the assumption that N is fixed while T tends to infinity, Ledoit and Wolf (2003)
prove that the optimal value δ ∗ asymptotically behaves like a constant over T (up to
higher-order terms). This constant, called κ, can be written as

                                                π−ρ
                                          κ=
                                                 γ

Here, π denotes the sum of asymptotic variances ofh the i entries of the sample covari-
                           √     PN PN                √
ance matrix scaled by T : π = i=1 j=1 AsyVar T sij . Similarly, ρ denotes the
sum of asymptotic covariances of the entries of the shrinkage target with
                                                                       h√the entries   of
                                        √           PN PN                        √     i
the sample covariance matrix scaled by T : ρ = i=1 j=1 AsyCov             T fij , T sij .
Finally, γ measures the misspecification of the (population) shrinkage target: γ =
PN PN                   2
  i=1   j=1 (φij − σij ) .

   If κ were known, we could use κ/T as the shrinkage intensity in practice. Unfortu-
nately, κ is unknown, so we find a consistent estimator for κ. This is done by finding
consistent estimators for the three ingredients π, ρ, and γ.

   First, a consistent estimator for π is
                N X
                  N                                  T
                X                                1X
         π̂ =             π̂ij   with     π̂ij =       {(yit − ȳi· )(yjt − ȳj· ) − sij }2
                i=1 j=1
                                                 T t=1

This result is proven by Ledoit and Wolf (2003).

   Second, a consistent estimator for ρ is a bit tedious to write down but quite straight-




                                                13
forward to implement. By definition
                    N X
                      N
                    X                      h√                  √      i
          ρ =                  AsyCov                T fij ,    T sij
                     i=1 j=1
                    N            h√       N N
                    X                  i X  X        h√ √            √      i
               =           AsyVar T sii +     AsyCov   T r̄ sii sjj , T sij
                     i=1                                  i=1 j=1,j6=i


On the diagonal, we know from Ledoit and Wolf (2003) again that

                                    h√                                 T
                                                 i            1 X                       2
                       AsyVar            T sii       = π̂ii =       (yit − ȳi· )2 − sii
                                                              T t=1

On the off-diagonal, we have
                                                        h√         √         √      i
                                     AsyCov                    T r̄ sii sjj , T sij

Since the estimation errorhin r̄ is asymptotically
                                                 i negligible and by use of the delta-
                           √ √             √
method, any term AsyCov      T r̄ sii sjj , T sij can be consistently estimated by

         r̄
              r
                   sjj        h√        √     i                    r
                                                                       sii        h√        √      i   
                       AsyCov    T sii , T sij +                           AsyCov    T sjj , T sij
         2         sii                                                 sjj
                                                                                         h√          √     i
Standard theory implies that a consistent estimator for AsyCov                                T sii , T sij is given
by
                           T
                        1 X
              ϑ̂ii,ij =       (yit − ȳi· )2 − sii {(yit − ȳi· )(yjt − ȳj· ) − sij }
                        T t=1
                                                                  h√         √       i
and that, analogously, a consistent estimator for AsyCov             T sjj , T sij is given by

                                T
                            1 X
               ϑ̂jj,ij =          (yjt − ȳj·)2 − sjj {(yit − ȳi· )(yjt − ȳj· ) − sij }
                            T t=1

Collecting terms now yields a consistent estimator for ρ:
                            N          N    N         r                             
                                                   r̄    sjj             sii
                            X         X    X                           r
                      ρ̂ =     π̂ii +                        ϑ̂ii,ij +       ϑ̂jj,ij
                           i=1        i=1 j=1,j6=i
                                                   2     sii             sjj




                                                                 14
    Third, a consistent estimator for γ is
                                          N X
                                          X N
                                   γ̂ =             (fij − sij )2
                                          i=1 j=1


This result follows from fij and sij being consistent estimators of φij and σij , respectively.

    Putting the pieces together yields a consistent estimator for κ:

                                                  π̂ − ρ̂
                                           κ̂ =
                                                     γ̂

    Finally, the estimated shrinkage intensity we propose for use in practice is:
                                                       
                                 ∗                 κ̂
                               δ̂ = max 0, min        ,1                                   (5)
                                                   T

The reason for this formula is the following. Although very unlikely, in principle it can
happen in finite sample that κ̂/T < 0 or that κ̂/T > 1, in which case we simply truncate
it at 0 or at 1, respectively.



C      Forecasting Expected Excess Returns

We want to mimic a skilled active manager. To do this, we rely on hindsight and
the forecast principles laid out in Grinold and Kahn (2000, Chapters 6 and 10). Our
description is necessarily brief and the reader is referred to this book for further details.

   Let eit denote the excess return of stock i during period t, that is, the return on the
stock minus the benchmark return. In a first step, we generate raw forecasts by adding
noise to the realized excess returns:

                                      rawit = eit + uit

The noise terms uit are normally distributed with mean zero and are independent of each
other both cross-sectionally and over time. For a given stock, the ex ante correlation
between eit and uit over time is known as the information coefficient (IC). In principal,
the IC could depend on i but, as is common, we choose a coefficient constant across
stocks. Which is an appropriate value for IC? In the absence of constraints on the active
manager (apart from being fully invested), the well-known Fundamental Law of Active
Management states that the ex ante information ratio (IR) of the manager is determined



                                                  15
by the IC and the breadth of the strategy:
                                              √
                                  IR ≈ IC ·       Breadth

The breadth term measures the number of independent active ‘bets’ the manager makes
in one year. Since in our study the portfolio will be updated every month and, by
construction, the forecasts are independent of each other, we have

                                    Breadth = 12 · N

Therefore, the IC is determined by the size of the benchmark, N , and the desired ex ante
information ratio, IR, which we fix at 1.5. Putting the various pieces together yields
                                            √
                                   IC = 1.5/ 12 · N

To give three examples, N = 30 yields IC = 0.0791, N = 100 yields IC = 0.0433, and
N = 500 yields IC = 0.0194.

   In a second step, the raw forecasts for each stock are converted to scores by subtract-
ing their sample mean, rawi· , and dividing by their sample standard deviation, sraw,i .

                                             rawit − raw i·
                                 scoreit =
                                                sraw,i

    In a third and final step, the scores are transformed into refined forecasts using the
relationship
                              Alpha = Volatility · IC · Score

Here, volatility refers to the excess return of a given stock. We estimate this by the
sample standard deviation of the realized excess returns eit over time. Denoting this
standard deviation by se,i , the formula for the final step is

                                 α̂it = se,i · IC · scoreit


    Note that the ex post information ratio of an active manager will in general not be
equal to the ex ante value of 1.5. This is because (i) the manager is bound by constraints
(such as a long-only constraint and upper limits on the portfolio weight of each stock);
(ii) the manager has to estimate Σ in practice; (iii) due to the randomness of the uit ,
the ex post correlation between between eit and uit over time will not be equal to IC.
The first two facts have a negative effect on the ex post information ratio. The third
fact can go either way. It is therefore possible in practice, though not very likely, that
the ex post information ratio is higher than the ex ante value of 1.5. To smooth out the

                                             16
inherent randomness in the realized information ratios, we repeat the forecasting process
50 times in our empirical study of Section 4 and then report mean-summaries.



References
Clarke, R., de Silva, H., and Thorley, S. (2002). Portfolio constraints and the funda-
  mental law of active management. Financial Analysts Journal, 58(5):48–66.

Connor, G. (1995). The three types of factor models: A comparison of their explanatory
  power. Financial Analysts Journal, 51(3):42–46.

Connor, G. and Korajczyk, R. A. (1993). A test for the number of factors in an approx-
  imate factor model. Journal of Finance, 48:1263–1291.

Efron, B. and Morris, C. (1977). Stein’s paradox in statistics. Scientific American,
  236(5):119–127.

Frost, P. A. and Savarino, J. E. (1986). An empirical Bayes approach to portfolio
  selection. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 21:293–305.

Grinold, R. C. and Kahn, R. N. (2000). Active Portfolio Management. McGraw-Hill,
  New York, second edition.

Jagannathan, R. and Ma, T. (2003). Risk reduction in large portfolios: Why imposing
  the wrong constraints helps. Journal of Finance, 54(4):1651–1684.

Jobson, J. D. and Korkie, B. (1980). Estimation for Markowitz efficient portfolios.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75:544–554.

Jorion, P. (1986). Bayes-Stein estimation for portfolio analysis. Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis, 21:279–292.

Jorion, P. (2003). Portfolio optimization with constraints on tracking error. Financial
  Analysts Journal, 59(5):70–82.

Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2003). Improved estimation of the covariance matrix of stock
  returns with an application to portfolio selection. Journal of Empirical Finance,
  10(5):603–621.

Ledoit, O. and Wolf, M. (2004). A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional
  covariance matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 88(2):365–411.

Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7:77–91.


                                           17
Michaud, R. (1989). The Markowitz optimization enigma: Is optimized optimal? Fi-
 nancial Analysts Journal, 45:31–42.

Michaud, R. (1998). Efficient Assset Management: A Practial Guide to Stock Portfolio
 Optimization. Oxford University Press.

Roll, R. (1992). A mean/variance analysis of tracking error. Journal of Portfolio Man-
  agement, 18(4):13–22.

Scherer, B. (2002). Portolio Construction and Risk Budgeting. Risk Books, London.

Sharpe, W. F. (1963). A simplified model for portfolio analysis. Management Science,
  9(1):277–293.

Stein, C. (1955). Inadmissibility of the usual estimator for the mean of a multivariate
  normal distribution. In Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical
  Statistics and Probability, pages 197–206. University of California Press.

Wilcox, J. (1994). EAFE is for wimps. Journal of Portfolio Management, 20:68–75.




                                          18
D     Tables and Figures




Table 1: Summary Statistics of Benchmark Returns. This table presents summary
statistics for monthly real returns of several value-weighted benchmark indices. The data
range from 02/1983 until 12/2002, yielding 239 returns. The size of the benchmark is
denoted by N . All numbers are annualized.


                            N = 30     N = 50     N = 100    N = 225    N = 500

     Mean                    13.63      13.50      13.29       13.45      13.42
     Standard Deviation      15.12      15.02      14.76       14.56      14.52




                                           19
Table 2: Mean-Summary Statistics for Excess Returns with Gain = 300 bp
This table presents ex post information ratios, means, and standard deviations of real-
ized excess returns. The gain (i.e., the expected excess return) was fixed at 300 basis
points. The out-of-sample period is 02/1983 until 12/2002, yielding 239 monthly excess
returns. The size of the benchmark is denoted by N . ‘Sample’ denotes the sample covari-
ance matrix; ‘Shrink-CC’ denotes our shrinkage estimator (2); ‘Shrink-SF’ denotes the
shrinkage estimator of Ledoit and Wolf (2003); ‘PC-5’ denotes the estimator based on
the first five principal components. The results are mean-summaries over 50 repetitions.
All numbers are annualized.


                                     IR        Mean      SD

                                       N = 30
                       Sample       0.97    2.18         2.26
                       Shrink-CC    1.24    2.50         2.03
                       Shrink-SF    1.18    2.39         2.04
                       PC-5         1.17    2.45         2.10

                                       N = 50
                       Sample       0.79    1.92         2.44
                       Shrink-CC    1.14    2.21         1.95
                       Shrink-SF    1.08    2.13         1.98
                       PC-5         1.11    2.18         1.96

                                       N = 100
                       Sample       0.59     1.71        2.93
                       Shrink-CC    0.91     1.87        2.06
                       Shrink-SF    0.89     1.86        2.10
                       PC-5         0.91     1.87        2.07

                                       N = 225
                       Sample       0.37     2.37        6.45
                       Shrink-CC    0.54     2.53        4.97
                       Shrink-SF    0.57     2.37        4.30
                       PC-5         0.55     2.42        4.46

                                       N = 500
                       Sample       0.20     1.92        8.53
                       Shrink-CC    0.30     1.82        5.77
                       Shrink-SF    0.33     1.74        5.13
                       PC-5         0.31     1.59        5.05




                                          20
Table 3: Mean-Summary Statistics for Average Monthly Turnover This table
presents average monthly turnovers for various strategies. The gain (i.e., the expected
excess return) was fixed at 300 basis points. The out-of-sample period is 02/1983 until
12/2002, yielding 239 monthly portfolio updates. The size of the benchmark is denoted
by N . ‘Sample’ denotes the sample covariance matrix; ‘Shrink-CC’ denotes our shrinkage
estimator (2); ‘Shrink-SF’ denotes the shrinkage estimator of Ledoit and Wolf (2003);
‘PC-5’ denotes the estimator based on the first five principal components. The results
are mean-summaries over 50 repetitions.


                       N = 30     N = 50 N = 100 N = 225 N = 500
             Sample     0.39       0.50   0.66    0.80    0.85
             Shrink-CC 0.33        0.39   0.50    0.65    0.75
             Shrink-SF 0.34        0.41   0.52    0.66    0.76
             PC-5       0.33       0.39   0.50    0.64    0.73




                                          21
                                     Realized Information Ratios; Gain = 300bp




    1.5




    1.0




    0.5




    0.0




    −0.5

             N=30    N=30     N=50      N=50        N=100   N=100    N=225       N=225   N=500   N=500




Figure 1: Boxplots of the realized information ratios with a gain of 300 basis points. For
any given index size N , the first boxplot corresponds to the sample covariance matrix
and the second one corresponds to the shrinkage estimator (2). The plots show the 50
repetitions which gave rise to the mean-summaries in Table 2.




                                               22
