arXiv:physics/0601166v3 [physics.soc-ph] 11 Jan 2008
                                                           How many independent bets are there in an
                                                                      emerging market?
                                                                            Daniel Polakow†and Tim Gebbie‡∗
                                                                                        March 12, 2018


                                                                                             Abstract
                                                                 The benefits of portfolio diversification is a central tenet implicit to
                                                             modern financial theory and practice. Linked to diversification is the
                                                             notion of breadth. Breadth is correctly thought of as the number of in-
                                                             dependent bets available to an investor. Conventionally applications us-
                                                             ing breadth frequently assume only the number of separate bets. There
                                                             may be a large discrepancy between these two interpretations. We uti-
                                                             lize a simple singular-value decomposition (SVD) and the Keiser-Gutman
                                                             stopping criterion to select the integer-valued effective dimensionality of
                                                             the correlation matrix of returns. In an emerging market such as South
                                                             African we document an estimated breadth that is considerably lower
                                                             than anticipated. This lack of diversification may be because of market
                                                             concentration, exposure to the global commodity cycle and local currency
                                                             volatility. We discuss some practical extensions to a more statistically
                                                             correct interpretation of market breadth, and its theoretical implications
                                                             for both global and domestic investors.

                                                              Keywords: Effective dimensions; Covariance Estimation; Emerging Markets



                                                       1    Introduction
                                                       One of the most widely accepted tenets of financial theory is the principle that
                                                       diversification is an essential component of any well-constructed portfolio. Di-
                                                       versification serves to mitigate specific sources or risk within any single asset
                                                       class, and systemic sources of risk across asset classes. Hence holding long po-
                                                       sitions in two resource companies suchs as BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, may
                                                       go a good way towards lessening the impact of company-specific risk within the
                                                       international resources sector.
                                                          ∗ Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, 7700,

                                                       South Africa, and Peregrine Securities, PO Box 44586, Claremont, 7735, South Africa,
                                                       danielp@peregrine.co.za ‡Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, Univer-
                                                       sity of Cape Town, Rondebosch, 7700, South Africa, †tim.gebbie@physics.org




                                                                                                  1
     Similarly, being exposed to property within a balanced (mutual) portfolio
lessens the threat that other asset classes under-perform if property rallies. The
idea is that spreading ones bets results in value being unlocked slowly over
time and that diversification is a way to deal with an uncertain and volatile
investment universe. These are fairly convincing argument’s to most.
     On a simple mathematical level, through diversification, one enhances ones
risk-adjusted return by nature of a principal impact on any ‘risk’ denominator,
be it the standard deviation of a Sharpe ratio or the active risk of an information
ratio [3, ?]. A portfolio that is comfortably diversified is expected to have a
higher Sharpe ratio and information ratio. Diversification is frequently lauded
as the only free lunch that econometrics offers to fund managers, and “one ought
to indulge heartily at the price” [6].
     It is from this optimistic base that we enter the fray with the allegation that
‘diversification’ opportunities may be both limited and overstated. Diversifi-
cation in its common pretext acts more to disguise value-add than to enhance
it. Interestingly, the usefulness of diversification in the way it was originally
intended is particularly limited in South Africa and possibly other emerging
markets for some less-than obvious reasons, as we discuss later. As we illus-
trate, because diversification is a frequently misunderstood phenomenon it can
clearly be a very mixed blessing.
     To the skilled fund-manager diversification may actually be an impediment.
Spreading ones bets too thinly across independent gambits condemns such tal-
ent towards the manifestation of mediocrity since there is little room to move
efficiently in all dimensions. To the less prudent fund manager, however, diver-
sification will often offer a safe-haven where poor bets amongst will be simul-
taneously countered by good ones in others. Furthermore, we show that in the
context of conventional asset classes within Southern Africa, there is a lot less
room to maneuver than most professional investors suspect due to an overriding
communality of extraneous factors that impact similarly on a wide variety of
asset classes.
     This has both implications for those global investors naively treating emerg-
ing markets as an independent asset class, those seeking international diver-
sification from within an emerging market, and attempts to understand the
theoretical applicability of asset pricing models in emerging markets.
     In section 1.1 we discuss ‘breadth’; how it is understood, used, and typically
misused. This is followed in section 1.2 by a discussion of well-known multi-
variate statistical technique that facilitates a more correct understanding of the
available breadth within any universe of assets: using the singular value decom-
position in conjunction with the Keiser-Gutman stopping criterion, to select the
integer-valued effective dimensionality of a correlation matrix of returns, with
eigenvalues greater-than or equal to 1. We are then able, in section 1.3 to illus-
trate the available breadth to investors in South African markets, by using some
well known multivariate statistical techniques in relation to three examples: a
portfolio of equity (See Figure’s 1 and 2), an equity and bond portfolio (See Fig-
ure’s 3 and 4) and last, a portfolio including, in addition to equity and bonds,
cash, property and international bonds and international equity (See Figure 5

                                         2
and 6).
    Lastly, in light of the insights provided from these previous chapters, in
section 2 we reconsider the role that asset allocation has within the context of
a resident balanced portfolio and also focus our discussion within the context
of the useful fundamental law of active management [1, 3].

1.1    Breadth - Independence rather then separateness?
Conventional theory suggests that an increase in diversification opportunities
(N) is accompanied by an increase in one′ s information ratio (IR) [3]. Hence, in
the terminology of active management, an increase in N serves to enhance ones
ability to exploit information. Note at the onset that N is defined and treated
as the number of separate bets (sensu Clarke et al. 2002).
    For example, assume we have a 60% chance of getting equity bets correct. A
bet on one underlying will yield an IR of 0.2, a bet on five underlying securities,
an IR of 0.45 and a bet on 20 underlying securities, an IR of 0.90. This situation
is easily verified. The understanding stemming from this detail is universal.
For example, Lee Thomas [6] notes the following implications for considering
diversification in the selfsame light:

  1. Since diversification has an obvious statistical basis, a larger number of
     bets will produce a higher information ratio.
  2. A lot of the differences between fund managers performances are often
     ascribed to ‘skill’ whereas the differences may simply be an artifact of
     better diversified portfolios.
  3. The search for higher quality investments should be superseded by the
     search for diversified investments.
  4. Diversification is paramount to investment success across asset classes,
     styles and countries. Diversify, diversify, diversify!
    The above-mentioned argument’s are very appealing, and very well utilized,
but we disagree with each and every contention since all omit two essential
truisms, which when understood, shed a very different light on the benefits of
diversification and the nature of breadth.

Lemma 1.1 (Independence is not separateness) The square root of N in
mathematical statistics implies ‘independence’ amongst statistical units (here
bets) [5] rather than simply the notion of ‘separate bets’ as is most often implied.

   If I hold a portfolio of 10 single stocks, do I really have 10 ‘independent’ bets
and is my breadth really 3.16? If I increase this to 1000 single stocks (assuming I
have as many available), is my breadth 31.6? This is the key theoretical question
dealt with here.




                                         3
Lemma 1.2 (Skill does not scale over breadth) Skill is not generally or
simply scalable over breadth. One requires considerable skill in preserving ones
information coefficient (or IC) [1] across an increasingly diverse universe of
investable underlying securities.

There is no a priori reason to expect, for argument’s sake, a South African
fund manager or analyst to be as adept in understanding the earnings potential
of a diversified industrial company, as in understanding the risks and upside
of Chinese private equity; yet there is a continuity of forecasting skill invoked
across both. This is a key practical implication considered here.
    Taken to its logical extreme, there is no reason to expect the same informa-
tion coefficients (IC) between any two underlying securities. IC is an average
measure that is typically applied to the sum total of all bets in a portfolio. We
need to disaggregate the measure to understand its scalability.
    Understanding the reality and the benefits of diversification resides in un-
derstanding both truisms given in Lemma (1.1) and Lemma (1.2) concurrently.
We focus on the following three pertinent questions:

Question #1 Just how many South African single stocks do I need to add to a
    portfolio before I start to replicate pre-existing elements of diversification
    (i.e. saturate all elements of independence)?
Question #2 Do I capture much more ‘breadth’ if I include other local and
    international asset classes?
Question #3 What are the implications of these findings to fund managers?

1.2    Methodology - The informational content in a SVD
The foundation of this research arises from the confusion between the notions of
‘separate bets’ and ‘independent bets’; the two are not the same. The question
really is - how alike are they, and are there better ways for understanding
independence than through the manner in which [3, 1] imply? We believe there
are several ways to better represent independence than through Grinolds original
construct.
    For our purposes, as well as for ease of replication, we make use of the prin-
ciple of ‘effective dimensionality’: given a return matrix X, we us the singular-
value decomposition to factorize X as X = U ΣV T for eigenvectors Σ = diag(Σ)
and eigenvalues U . The unitary matrix U spans the subspace where the varia-
tions in the data are the largest. Each eigenvalue has an associated eigenvector.
We then utilize the Keiser-Gutman [4] stopping criterion to select those eigen-
vectors with eigenvalues greater than or equal to one, the number of such eigen-
values corresponds to an estimation of the effective dimensions of the subspace
- the N in the fundamental equation of active management [3, ?].
    There are alternative means of defining the effective number of stocks in a
portfolio using entropy measures [9]. These all ultimately revolve around the
degree of localization of the portfolio controls under optimization, and hence


                                        4
pivot on the appropriate definition independence as differentiated for separate-
ness. Many definitions of entropy assume, a priori independence amongst the
states (here bets) of the system, this as we argue may in fact end up being
problematic in these new reformulations of the notion of effective number of
bets if not dealt with sensibly.

1.3    Empirical example of the enhanced application
We utilize return data from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) and the
Bond Exchange of South Africa (BESA) for the purposes of demonstrating both
our breadth computations as well as the evidenced effect of limited breadth
within the South African marketplace. We use daily data for a period of 4.3
years (March 2003 - present) for 41 of the most liquid equity stocks on the JSE.
The most liquid equity index is termed the Top-40 index. The period of 4.3
years is arbitrarily chosen as a cut off point where most of the equity counters
currently trading are subsumed in the analysis.
    We commence by computing the effective dimensionality of this sample of 41
single-stocks from the estimated correlation matrix. A projection of the single-
stocks (variables) onto the 2-D eigenvector space is represented in Figure 1. The
projection shows that some gold stocks (ANG, GFI and HAR) cluster together
at the extremes of the first two eigenvectors. Similarly, most banking stocks
(e.g. SBK, FSR, ASA and RMB) cluster at the opposite quadrant of the same
two eigenvectors.
    A scree-plot is used to map the decay of the eigenvalues by the dimensionality
of the data set in Figure 2.
    Using our Keiser-Gutman criterion, we compute the effective dimensionality
of the dataset as no more than 8 dimensions. This translated into an effective
breadth of about 3. The conventional use of√the fundamental law of active
management would estimate breadth here at 41 = 6, twice that evidenced
here.
    Next, we repeat the selfsame exercise as above, but now consider jointly the
selfsame period of eight total return series of the seven dominant government-
issued bonds along with our 41 single-stocks. A projection of the underlying
securities onto the 2D eigenvector space is noted in Figure 3.
    In Figure 4 a scree-plot is once again used to map the decay of the eigenvalues
by the dimensionality of the data set.
    The effective dimensionality is estimated as no more than 9 dimensions,
translating into an effective breadth of 3. Conventional analysis here would infer
a breadth of 7. Note how the analysis suggests both that South African bonds
do not present much of a diversification enhancement to an equity portfolio
and that replication of the self-same communalities exist. The reasons for these
anomalies are easily explained by the dominant role that the local exchange rate
plays on both equity and bond valuation and the impact of interest rates and
commodity pressures on both.
    Lastly, for the purposes of illustration, and to ascertain the place that the
South African marketplace assumes relative to international markets, we include


                                        5
                        Projection of variables into 2D eigenvector space


                                                               GFI
                                                                HAR
            0.3                                                ANG
                                                                                   AGL
                                                         LON
                                                                            AMS BIL
            0.2
                                                                           IMP
                                              ARI
                                                                       LBT
                                                                SAB
                                                                SAP     SOL
            0.1                                                           RCH
                                                                         OML

Factor 2
                                                           MLA
                                              KMB
                                                                             INP
             0                                                              INL
                                        MUR               NPK SHF

                                                                    BAW
                                                       PPC NTC NPNLGL
                                                                    REM
                                                        TKG TBS
           −0.1                                               PIK
                                                           WHL
                                                               NEDIPL BVT
                                                                       SLM
                                                             MTN
                                                                            ASA
           −0.2
                                                                              RMH
                                                                               FSR
                                                                             SBK


            −0.05   0        0.05              0.1              0.15               0.2
                                            Factor 1


Figure 1: Example #1: The projection of the single-stocks (variables) onto the
2-D eigenvector space is provided as a bi-plot for. Note the prevalence of the
bulk of the counters in two of the four quadrants. Note also that banking and
gold-mining stocks cluster at the two end extremes.


13 new international assets to our analysis, all hard-currency denominated, in-
cluding both bond indices and equity indices notably: the FT World Equity In-
dex (USD), the MSCI World Equity Index (USD), four US Government bonds of
varying duration (USD), Japanese inflation-linked bonds (JPY), a US corporate
bond index (USD), an Emerging Market Index (USD), the FTSE 100 (GBP),
the Russell 2000 (USD) , the Citigroup world government bond index (USD)
and the UK government bond index (GBP). A projection of the underlyings
onto the 2D eigenvector space is noted in Figure 5.
    It is interesting to note from 5 that most of the new (international) assets
span separate dimensions to the ones the South African securities occupy, apart
for two obvious exceptions. First, US bonds are related to South African bonds
- the correlations between these are strong and positive (as indicated by the
acute angle between the bi-plot radians). Second, South African single-stock
underlyings are inextricably tied to international equity markets - as evidenced
by the presence of both the FTSE World and MSCI World Equity Indices in the
same quadrant and in the same direction, despite the hard-currency differences
here.



                                                6
                                               Scree plot
             12




             10




              8




Eigenvalue
              6




              4




              2




              0
                  0      5   10    15         20          25       30   35   40   45
                                        Eigenvalue (factor) number


Figure 2: Example #1: The scree-plot mapping of the decay of the eigenvalues
by the dimensionality of the single equity stock universe. The effective dimen-
sionality of the data-set is found to be no more than 8 dimensions when using
the Keiser-Gutman criterion. This is an effective breadth of approximately 3.


    In Figure 6 a scree-plot is once again used to map the decay of the eigenvalues
by the dimensionality of the data set. Including 13 of what most investors
would consider to be a fairly diverse range of international asset classes to
our original dataset of 41 South-African equity underlyings together with eight
South African government issued bonds increases the effective dimensionality by
only 4(from 9 to 13). Conventional methods would impute a breadth of closer
to 8 whereas the actual breadth is closer to 4.


2                     Conclusion
Breadth in our approach takes on a meaning that is quite different from that
usually used, but is closer to the spirit of the idea, as it measures the benefit of
real diversification. The SVD approach to the problem handles independence
of the basis of spanning eigenvectors correctly whereas the notion typically as-
sumed, that gambles are independent by their very nature, is simply incorrect.
    One of the key results arising from this investigation into diversification
possibilities in an emerging market such as South Africa is the significant lim-


                                                      7
                                     Projection of variables into 2D eigenvector space


            0.4               R157
                            R201
                           R179
                          R153
                             R186



            0.3             R133




            0.2



Factor 2                                                                                 LBTRCH
                                                                                                 AGL
                                                                              SAP
                                                                               SAB           AMS BIL
            0.1                                                                            OML
                                                                                          SOL
                                                                          LON GFI
                                                                              HAR
                                                                             ANG             IMP
                                                                    ARI
                                   R197
                                     R189                                   MLA            INP
                                                                    KMB                   INL
                                                                               NTC
                                                                                SHF     REM
             0
                                                                            NPK
                                                                           TKG      NPN
                                                                          PPC TBS PIK LGL
                                                                                        BAW SLM
                                                            MUR
                                                                               WHLNED BVT
                                                                                 MTN      ASA
                                                                                      IPL     RMH
                                                                                               FSR
                                                                                             SBK
           −0.1



                  −0.05              0            0.05              0.1         0.15            0.2
                                                         Factor 1


Figure 3: Example #2: A projection of the underlyings onto the 2-D eigenvector
space. We include 8 dominant government-issued bonds along with the 41 single-
stocks.

itation of breath in the opportunity set. This breadth limitation may well be
due to a concentration of capital in a handful of local stocks within the South
African market. Some 33% of the market capitalization is contained in the
top-5 underlying securities. Interestingly, most of these stocks are dual-listed
overseas, hence further limiting the breadth expansion when international as-
sets are included in a resident South African portfolio. This breadth limitation
has implications for the variety and nature of the risk associated with invest-
ment strategies and questions conventional wisdom in the construction of global
funds.
    A common misconception prevalent in the literature regarding the benefits
of diversification is that skill is scaleable over breadth [6]. Hence, diversification
is a free lunch offered to a ‘diversified’ portfolio in the sense that a larger number
of bets effected with the same skill will produce higher IRs. However, the error is
made in assuming that one’s IC remains constant as breadth increases. Clearly,
it cannot. For every added dimension of independence, one seems to require
a novel skill-set. In the context of asset management, the implications of this
error in the context of a limited breadth debate are threefold.
    First, real diversification into breadth to achieve an optimal risk-adjusted
return (via the IR) requires skill (as gauged by IC). If IC is compromised by


                                                             8
                                            Scree plot
             12




             10




              8




Eigenvalue
              6




              4




              2




              0
                  0   5   10   15     20        25        30     35   40   45   50
                                    Eigenvalue (factor) number


Figure 4: Example #2 : The scree-plot showing the decay of the eigenvalues in
the equity-bond universe. The effective dimensionality is estimated as no more
than 9 dimensions, translating into an effective breadth of 3.


breadth increasing, as we expect it to be, it can be argued that ‘diversification’
is actually a recipe for mediocrity amongst professional fund managers in the
most general case. A prefatory analysis of several South African fund managers
show different levels and persistence of IC for different sectoral bets. It would be
of specific interest to quantify where the value resides within such institutions,
and how to best extricate this value-add in the context of a balanced (mutual
fund) mandate.
    Second, less breadth will exist within any one asset class than the funda-
mental law implies. For a unit of capital, shifting allocation within an asset
class will increase the breadth less (if at all) than shifting allocation across asset
classes (the idea of tactical asset allocation). In the context of the South African
marketplace, limited diversification exists within a highly concentrated equity
market such that a shift from one security to another represents more of a bet
about the relative spreads between their expected returns than it does anything
about diversification. In fact, a pair-trading strategy (in its own right) creates
a dimension of independence that is uncorrelated with either of the two original
underlying securities, but may be correlated with other positions.
    Lastly, it should be noted that tactical asset allocation can facilitate a rapid



                                                   9
                                     Projection of variables into 2D eigenvector space

             0.4
                              R157
                            R201
                            R179
                           R153
                             R186
            0.35


             0.3
                             R133
            0.25


             0.2



Factor 2
            0.15                                    US
                                                     US Gov
                                                        Gov 10yr Bond
                                                            5yr Bond
                                                    USGov
                                                   US  Gov2yr
                                                           30yr Bond
                                                              Bond                             AGL
                                                                                   SAP LBT RCH BIL
             0.1                                                                   SAB     AMS
                                                                                          OML
                                                                               LON       SOL
                                                                                 GFI
                                                                                  HAR      IMP
                                                                                 ANG
            0.05                                                       RUSS2
                                     R197                              ARI        MLA   FT100 INP
                                       R189                                                  INL
                                                                       KMB
                                        NUSUS                                      NTC     REM
              0                                                                     SHF
                             BJAPGI                                              NPK
                                                                                TKG TBS NPNLGL
                                          SALOMN                MUR                    MORGAN
                                                                                      PIK
                                                                               PPCFTWORU      SLM
                                                                                            BAW
           −0.05                                                                    WHLNED BVT
                                                                                     MTN IPL ASARMH
                                                                                               MSEMFI
                                            UKUS                                                  FSR
                                                                                                SBK
            −0.1


                   −0.05              0              0.05               0.1             0.15      0.2
                                                            Factor 1


Figure 5: Example #3: A projection of the underlyings onto the 2-D eigenvector
space. We include 13 international bonds and equity indices along with the 41
single-stocks and 8 government South African issued bonds.


breadth expansion by translating ’possible’ breadth into ‘realized’ breadth. The
pros and cons of asset allocation need to be considered in the selfsame context
of the skill that managers have in timing the movements in various asset classes
versus the diversification benefits of so doing. In this sense, our proposed mod-
ification to the fundamental law of active management provides a generalizable
framework in which both static, dynamic and tactical asset allocation can be
thoroughly and correctly investigated. In this context, IC(t), the information
coefficient as a function of term, is the basis on which any analysis needs to be
focussed.
    The prospects of utilizing the fundamental law in this manner are particu-
larly piquant and we hope that this research will stimulate some further work
in this area. We note that the coefficients that are ultimately derived form the
fundamental law of active management will not be comparable with previous
studies, where breadth has not been estimated correctly.




                                                               10
                                        Scree plot
             14




             12




             10




              8


Eigenvalue
              6




              4




              2




              0
                  0   10   20       30              40       50   60    70
                                Eigenvalue (factor) number


Figure 6: Example #3 : The scree-plot showing the decay of the eigenvalues in
the mixed universe. The effective dimensionality is estimated as no more than
13 dimensions, translating into an effective breadth of close to 4.


Acknowledgments
The MATLAB code and the data used to produce the graphs can be obtained
from DP. The authors thank Mark De Araujo, Diane Wilcox and Rayhaan
Joosub and for helpful insights and suggestions, comments and criticism.


References
   [1] Clarke, R., de Silva, H., and Thorley, S., (2002) Portfolio constraints and
       the fundamental law of active management, Financial Analyst Journal
       Sep/Oct 48-66.
   [2] Darnell, and Ferguson, K., (2000) Thoughts on Grinold and Kahn’s ’Fun-
       damental Law of Active Management’, First Quadrant Report.
   [3] Grinold, R. C., (1989) The fundamental law of active management. Journal
       of Portfolio Management, 15, 30-37.




                                              11
[4] Jackson, D. A., (1993) Stopping rules in principal component analysis: a
    comparison of heuristical and statistical approaches. Ecology, 74, 2204-
    2214.
[5] Rice, J.A., (1995) Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis, 2nd Ed.
    Duxbury Press.
[6] Thomas, L.R., (2005) Engineering an alpha engine. J. Investing, Winter
    2005, (2005) 23-31.
[7] Rudin, A.M, and Morgan, J.S., (2006) A Portfolio Diversification Index
    and systematic risks of hedge fund investment styles. J. Port. Management.
    Winter 2006, 81-89.
[8] Wilcox, D., Gebbie, T., (2004) On the analysis of cross-correlations in South
    African market data Physica A, Volume 344, Issues 1-2 , 1 December 2004,
    Pages 294-298
[9] Fernholz, R., (1999) Portfolio generating functions. In M. Avellaneda (Ed.),
    Quantitative Analysis in Financial Markets, World Scientific, River Edge,
    NJ.




                                      12
