University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
This paper is made available online in accordance with
publisher policies. Please scroll down to view the document
itself. Please refer to the repository record for this item and our
policy information available from the repository home page for
further information.
To see the final version of this paper please visit the publisher’s website.
Access to the published version may require a subscription.
Author(s): Kenneth F. Wallis
Article Title: Combining forecasts – forty years later
Year of publication: 2011
Link to published article:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09603107.2011.523179
Publisher statement: ‘This is an electronic version of an article
published in Wallis, Kenneth F. (2011). Combining forecasts – forty
years later, 21(1-2), pp. 33-41. Applied Financial Economics is
available online at: http://www.informaworld.com’

Combining Forecasts – Forty Years Later

Kenneth F. Wallis
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
[K.F.Wallis@warwick.ac.uk]

For a special issue of Applied Financial Economics in memory of C.W.J. Granger

Headnote This article is dedicated to the memory of Clive Granger, a founding editor of this
journal. Its title echoes the title of his invited review article in a special issue of the Journal
of Forecasting in 1989. That issue marked the twentieth anniversary of the publication of his
article with John Bates, which is widely regarded as the seminal article in the field of forecast
combination. This article returns to two of the topics in ‘Combining forecasts – twenty years
later’ that are of much current interest, namely the impact of forecasters’ different
information sets on the original point forecast combination result, and properties of different
methods of combining density forecasts. A parallel result to his inefficiency-of-meanforecasts result for point forecasts is seen to apply to density forecasts, where logarithmic
combination is shown to have some advantage over linear combination.

Keywords Point forecast combination; Density forecast combination; Forecast efficiency;
Calibration; Linear pool; Logarithmic pool

JEL codes C22, C53, E17

Acknowledgments I am grateful to Christopher Crowe for drawing attention to the work of
Kim, Lim and Shaw (2001), to James Mitchell for running additional simulations on the
model of Mitchell and Wallis (2010), and to Peter Hammond for helpful discussion.

1. Introduction

Clive Granger told in his Nobel autobiography how he came to forecasting as a line of
research that ‘had great potential’ by reading an advance copy of Box and Jenkins’ book in
1968. Two important articles quickly appeared, both in the British OR journal. First was an
article on forecasting with generalised cost functions, which has fewer citations than the
second article but is currently enjoying a resurgence of interest, as research finds increasing
evidence that responses to forecast surveys in several countries exhibit important departures
from the quadratic loss function that is found so convenient in theoretical work. Second was
the seminal article with John Bates on forecast combination, which opened up a whole new
sub-field in forecasting. Although Bates and Granger (1969) cited an earlier article by
Barnard (1963) which contained an empirical example in which a simple average of two
forecasts had smaller Mean Square Error (MSE) than either of the individual forecasts, theirs
was the first work to develop a general analysis of the point forecast combination problem.
Twenty years after its publication, Clemen (1989) provided a review of the new field and an
annotated bibliography containing over 200 items, which he described as ‘an explosion in the
number of articles on the combination of forecasts.’ Clemen’s article in the International
Journal of Forecasting was accompanied by several commentaries and reflections by leading
researchers, while the Journal of Forecasting simultaneously published a special issue on
combining forecasts, in which the first article was ‘Combining forecasts – twenty years later’
(Granger, 1989). This article returns to two of the topics in that article, forty years after Bates
and Granger’s work.

Clive Granger’s remarkably long list of publications includes several articles in which
he discussed current developments and future prospects in particular fields of time-series
econometrics. They are full of his thoughts on where more research was needed and his ideas
on how that research could be developed. They are more forward-looking than backwardlooking, containing very little by way of literature review. In the present case, although the
Journal of Forecasting described his article as an ‘invited review article’, he explicitly
excluded an ‘attempt to survey the literature on combining, which is now voluminous and
rather repetitive.’ More often, such an exclusion was implicit rather than explicit, without
any excuse being offered, and the pages were devoted to an unceasing flow of new ideas and
creative suggestions, which became an invaluable resource for other researchers. Not all of
these ideas have stood the test of time, but his success rate is notably high.
1

A major theme of ‘Twenty years later’ is the relevance of information sets, discussion
of which ‘is an essential feature of all forecasting situations, including combining.’ Section 2
of this article revisits its analysis of how the original treatment of point forecast combination
is affected when competing forecasters have different information sets, and all of them use
their own information efficiently. Explicit expressions are presented for the forecast MSEs
that support its main result, referred to as ‘the inefficiency of mean forecasts’ in independent
work by a later group of authors. The simple average of several available forecasts has been
a popular summary device for as long as competing forecasts have been available, and how it
might be improved, in similarly simple fashion, remains a topic of interest.

The final ‘extensions’ considered in ‘Twenty years later’ concern the combination of
uncertainty measures such as quantiles, which ‘is a step towards the larger question of how
we would combine or aggregate distributions.’ As I have observed (Wallis, 2005),
distributions have been aggregated ever since Zarnowitz (1969) published averages of the
density forecasts of inflation and GNP growth supplied in histogram form by respondents to
the ASA-NBER survey of forecasts by economic statisticians (continued since 1990 as the
Survey of Professional Forecasters). I noted that the finite mixture distribution is an
appropriate statistical model for such combined density forecasts; the same algebraic form
appears in statistical decision theory as the linear opinion pool, and the two terms have come
to be used interchangeably. On the other hand the quantile-based methods of combining
forecast distributions proposed in ‘Twenty years later’ have not been taken up.

A popular choice of functional form for interval and density forecasts is the normal
distribution. When combining density forecasts it might be desired for presentational reasons
and/or analytical convenience that the combined forecast retains the same functional form as
the component forecasts, but in the normal case linear combination does not deliver this.
Section 3 of this article considers the properties of the logarithmic opinion pool or geometric
average of component normal density forecasts, which does preserve this distributional form,
as an alternative to linear combination. An example is constructed as an additional variant
forecast in the Monte Carlo experiment of Mitchell and Wallis (2010). With respect to the
probabilistic calibration and goodness-of-fit of combined density forecasts, some parallels
with the inefficiency of mean (point) forecasts discussed in Section 2 are observed.

2

2. Point forecasts with different information sets

The basic optimality result of Bates and Granger (1969) is that a linear combination of two
competing point forecasts using the optimal (variance minimising) weight in general has a
smaller forecast MSE than either of the two competing forecasts. It might have seemed
counter intuitive that combining with an inferior forecast could improve matters, relative to
the MSE measure, but combining using the weight that is optimal with respect to the same
measure is seen to achieve this. The only case in which no improvement is possible is that in
which one forecast is already the optimal (minimum MSE) forecast; its optimal weight is then
1, and there is no gain in combining with an inferior forecast, whose weight is
correspondingly 0. Twenty years later Granger (1989, p.168) noted that in this original
setting the two forecasts were implicitly based on the same information set, and ‘For
combining to produce a superior forecast, both component forecasts clearly had to be
suboptimal. It is more usual for combining to produce a better forecast when the individual
forecasts are based on different information sets, and each may be optimal for their particular
set.’

A stylised representation of this more usual situation is obtained by assuming that
each forecaster’s information set has two components, one available to all N forecasters and
the other available only to the specific individual, with the various components assumed to be
mutually independent. All the information available to all the forecasters is referred to as the
universal information set. The target variable is denoted yt , and the contents of the public
and private information sets are the current and past values of the variables zt and
x jt , j = 1,..., N , respectively. These could be vector series, but are taken to be univariate for

convenience. If the universal information set U t were known, the optimum linear least
squares one-step-ahead forecast would be

Et = E ( yt +1 U t )
N

= α ( B) zt + ∑ β j ( B) x jt

(1)

j =1

where α ( B ), β j ( B) are lag operator polynomials. This is equation (1) of Granger (1989),
with subscript t replacing his subscript n. He continues ‘With the assumptions made, the
optimum forecast of the jth person is
3

E jt = α ( B) zt + β j ( B ) x jt .

(2)

Forming a simple average of these individual forecasts gives

Et =

1 N
∑ E jt
N j =1

1 N
= α ( B ) zt + ∑ β j ( B ) x jt .’
N j =1

(3)

Clearly, neither this equally-weighted combination of the individual forecasts nor any other
combination with weights adding to one achieves the optimum forecast Et . ‘It is seen that
aggregating forecasts is not the same as aggregating information sets. Et is based on all the
information, but is not equal to Et , as the information is not being used efficiently.’
However, if yet another forecast is constructed, using only the public information, namely

E0t = α ( B ) zt

(4)

‘then it is seen immediately that the optimal forecast Et can be achieved by
N

Et = ∑ E jt − ( N − 1) E0t .’

(5)

j =1

No direct comparisons of forecast efficiency are given in this analysis, and we pursue
these in a slightly modified setting. We redefine zt and x jt , j = 1,..., N , as the components
of the forecasts of yt +1 based on public and private information respectively, and denote the
respective MSEs of zt and x jt as σ 02 and σ12 , constant over j. Then the individual forecasts
constructed as the optimally ‘inverse MSE’ weighted combination of the two components,
and their MSEs, are

E jt =

σ12 zt + σ 02 x jt
σ12 + σ 02

,

(2')

σ 02σ12
MSE ( E jt ) = 2
, j = 1,..., N .
σ1 + σ 02
We note that this alternative definition of zt and x jt does not affect the structure of the
forecast E jt : the variance weights in equation (2') are incorporated in the least squares

4

coefficients α ( B) and β j ( B ) of the originally defined variables in equation (2). The
corresponding mean of the N individual forecasts, and its MSE, is

σ12 zt +
Et =

1 N 2
∑ σ 0 x jt
N j =1

σ12 + σ 02

,

⎛

MSE ( Et ) =

σ 02σ12 ⎜⎜ σ12 +

(

⎝

(3')

σ 02 ⎞

)

⎟
N ⎟⎠

2
σ12 + σ 02

.

It is clear that the MSE of the mean forecast is less than the MSE of each individual forecast,
increasingly so as N increases. The optimal forecast given the universal information set is a
similarly modified version of equation (1); together with its MSE we have
N

σ12 zt + ∑ σ 02 x jt
j =1
2
σ1 + Nσ 02

Et =

MSE ( Et ) =

(

,

(1')

σ 02σ12
σ12 + Nσ 02

)

.

The inefficiency of the mean forecast, that is, MSE ( Et ) > MSE ( Et ) follows on observing
that
⎛ 2 σ 02 ⎞ 2
2
2
2 2
if N>1.
⎜⎜ σ1 +
⎟⎟ σ1 + Nσ 0 > σ1 + σ 0
N ⎠
⎝

(

) (

)

Finally, we see that the optimal forecast can be achieved as a combination of the mean
forecast and the public forecast, as above. Noting that equation (5) gives the optimal forecast
as the combination kEt + (1 − k ) E0t with weight k = N , the effect of the modifications in the

present paragraph is to require
k=

(

N σ12 + σ 02

)

σ12 + Nσ 02

in order to obtain the corresponding result.

Equivalent results to these modified results, except the last one, are given completely
independently by Kim, Lim and Shaw (2001), working in accounting and finance and making
no reference to the statistical forecasting literature. They consider several financial analysts

5

forecasting a firm’s forthcoming earnings. Each analyst possesses both common and private
information, in the form of a public and a private signal, each equal to the forthcoming
earnings plus a zero-mean random error. The assumed source of random variation – noise in
the signals – differs from that assumed in the forecasting literature – the innovation in the
data-generating process – but the main result, referred to as ‘the inefficiency of mean
forecasts’ and expressed in terms of the precision of the signals rather than forecast MSEs, is
the same. However Kim, Lim and Shaw do not consider the possibility of constructing a
fully efficient forecast, with no equivalent to equation (5) above, since ‘neither analysts’
common nor private information is separately observable’ (2001, p.330). Instead they
consider the exploitation of a sequence of signals and associated forecast revisions in a fixedevent forecast context. Models in which agents receive noisy public and private signals about
the underlying state have a long history in economics, serving to relax the Walrasian
postulate of complete information: see, for example, the references given by Morris and Shin
(2002) prior to their analysis of the social value of public information. As with the
forecasting literature, however, Kim, Lim and Shaw’s work is independent of this.

Crowe (2010) similarly considers the fixed-event context of the forecasts of economic
growth collected by Consensus Economics in several countries: forecasts for the current year
and the next year are collected monthly. The source of the inefficiency in the mean or
‘consensus’ forecast is interpreted as its overweighting of public information – compare
equations (1) and (3) or (1') and (3'). In fixed-event forecasting the public information
includes previously published mean forecasts of the same target variable, and hence the
successive revisions to those mean forecasts. The manifestation of the inefficiency is
(negative) correlation between the mean forecast and its forecast error, the latter being a
function of all past forecast revisions. Consideration of this relationship allows an estimate
of the efficient forecast to be obtained via an adjustment to the current mean forecast which
depends on the latest forecast revision. With the model estimated for 38 countries over the
period 1989-2006, evaluation of out-of-sample current-year forecasts for 2007 and 2008
shows that efficiency gains of some 5% root mean square error could have been achieved.

6

3. Linear and logarithmic combination of density forecasts

We consider N individual density forecasts of a random variable Y at some future time,
denoted f j ( y ) , j = 1,..., N , with means and variances μ j , σ 2j . For economy of notation
time subscripts and references to the information sets on which the forecasts are conditioned
are suppressed. The linear combination or finite mixture distribution is
N

fC ( y ) = ∑ w j f j ( y ) ,

(6)

j =1

with weights w j ≥ 0, j = 1,..., N , Σw j = 1. The combined density has mean and variance
N

μC = ∑ w j μ j ,

(7)

j =1

σ C2 =

N

∑

j =1

w jσ 2j +

N

∑ w j ( μ j − μC ) .
2

(8)

j =1

If the density forecast means are equal to the point forecasts, and equal weights w j = 1 N are
used, then equation (7) gives the simple average point forecast, and equation (8) gives the
variance of the combined density as the average individual variance plus a measure of the
dispersion of the individual point forecasts. This decomposition of the combined variance
into measures of uncertainty and disagreement is employed in recent studies of survey
forecasts in the UK (Boero, Smith and Wallis, 2008) and the US (Rich and Tracy, 2010). As
noted above, the linear combination of normal densities is not a normal density, indeed it may
be multimodal; it was the consideration of a mixture of two normal distributions by Pearson
(1894) that initiated the finite mixture distribution literature.

The logarithmic opinion pool first appeared, according to Genest and Zidek’s (1986)
survey of combining probability distributions, in an unpublished 1972 manuscript by Michael
Bacharach, who in turn, they say, attributed it to Peter Hammond, but there appears to be no
surviving copy of either Bacharach’s manuscript or Hammond’s communication. A further
remark by Genest and Zidek (1986, p.119) suggests that Winkler (1968) earlier referred to the
logarithmic opinion pool, and later authors, for example Kascha and Ravazzolo (2010,
pp.233, 237), similarly reference Winkler, but this is not correct: Winkler (1968) does not
mention the logarithmic opinion pool. For Genest and Zidek, the most compelling reason for
using the logarithmic opinion pool is that the processes of pooling and updating then

7

commute. That is, suppose (a) individual distributions are first combined, then the combined
distribution is updated following Bayes’ rule using some later observation, or (b) individual
distributions are first updated using the later (common) observation, then combined: with
logarithmic pooling both approaches give the same result, but not with linear pooling. For
this reason the logarithmic opinion pool is sometimes said to be ‘externally Bayesian’ (see,
for example, Faria and Smith, 1997), since to an external observer the combined forecast
looks like that of a single Bayesian forecaster.

The logarithmic combination is usually written using the geometric form, as

∏ f j ( y) ,
fG ( y ) =
w
∫ ∏ f j ( y)dy
wj

(9)

j

where the denominator is a constant that ensures that fG ( y ) is a proper density. Our main
interest lies in the logarithmic combination’s preservation of the normality of component
distributions; more generally, if the component distributions are from the regular exponential
family, then the combined distribution is from the same family and hence, in particular, is
unimodal (Faria and Mubwandarikwa, 2008). Formally, for the normal case, we have that if

(

)

(

f j ( y ) = N μ j , σ 2j , j = 1,..., N , then fG ( y ) = N μG , σ G2

) where

μj
μG N
=
w
,
∑
j
σ G2 j =1 σ 2j
1

N

1

σG

j =1

σ 2j

= ∑ wj
2

(10)

.

(11)

With equal weights w j = 1 N on the densities, equation (11) gives σ G2 as the harmonic mean
of the individual variances; this is less than their arithmetic mean, which is less than the finite
mixture variance given in equation (8). Substituting into equation (10) then gives the
combined mean or point forecast as a linear combination of the component means with
inverse variance weights. Thus logarithmic combination with equal weights delivers a
combined point forecast that is more efficient than the linear combination with equal weights,
unless the component forecast variances are equal, in which case the two combined means
coincide. In practice it is often found that competing forecast variances are not very different
from one another, in which case it may be more efficient to impose equal weights than to

8

estimate the weights – the squared bias is less than the estimation variance (Smith and Wallis,
2009).

Example

We add a logarithmic combination to some of the competing forecasts that appear in the
simulation study of Mitchell and Wallis (2010), which extends the example given by Wallis
(2005). The data-generating process is the Gaussian second-order autoregression

(

)

Yt = φ1Yt −1 + φ2Yt −2 + ε t , ε t ~ N 0,σ ε2 .
The universal information set comprises the observations yt −1 and yt −2 , the model and its
parameter values, hence the important practical effects of model uncertainty and parameter
estimation error are neglected. Then the optimal or ‘ideal’ density forecast of yt is

(

)

fo ( yt ) = N φ1 yt −1 + φ2 yt −2 , σ ε2 .
The first individual forecaster (labelled AR1 below) assumes that the data are generated by a
first-order autoregression and so issues the forecast

(

)

f1 ( yt ) = N ρ1 yt −1, σ12 ,
while the second individual (AR2) similarly uses only a single observation but is subject to a
one-period data delay, so the forecast is

(

)
where σ12 = (1 − ρ12 ) σ y2 , σ 22 = (1 − ρ 22 ) σ y2 , σ ε2 = (1 − φ1ρ1 − φ2 ρ 2 ) σ y2 and ρ , i = 1, 2 , are the
f 2 ( yt ) = N ρ 2 yt −2 , σ 22 ,

i

autocorrelation coefficients:

ρ1 = φ1 (1 − φ2 ) , ρ 2 = φ1ρ1 + φ2 .

The linear combination of these two individual forecasts, with equal weights, is the
finite mixture distribution

(

)

(

)

fC ( yt ) = 0.5 N ρ1 yt −1, σ12 + 0.5 N ρ2 yt −2 , σ 22 ,
with mean and variance obtained from equations (7) and (8). The logarithmic combination is
a normal distribution with mean and variance given as

μG =

σ 22 ρ1 yt −1 + σ12 ρ 2 yt −2
,
σ12 + σ 22
9

σ G2 =

2σ12σ 22

σ12 + σ 22

.

The composite information set for the combined density forecasts includes the same two
observations as the information set of the optimal forecast. However the combined forecasts
use this information inefficiently, relative to the optimal forecast. This parallels the
inefficiency of the mean (point) forecast discussed in Section 2.

A standard tool for checking the distributional form of density forecasts is the
sequence of probability integral transform (PIT) values of the outcomes in the forecast
distributions
pt = Ft ( yt ) ,

where Ft (.) is the forecast cumulative distribution function. For the ideal forecast, the pt s
are independent uniform U (0,1) variables. If the forecast is the correct conditional

distribution with respect to its specific information set, then the pt s are uniformly but in
general not independently distributed: such a forecast satisfies ‘probabilistic calibration’ but
not ‘complete calibration’. Uniformity is often assessed in an exploratory manner, by
inspection of histograms of PIT values, for example, and goodness-of-fit tests are also
available, although their performance is affected by departures from independence. For a
joint test of complete calibration we consider the likelihood ratio test of Berkowitz (2001),
based on the inverse normal transformation of the pt s, namely zt = Φ −1 ( pt ) , where Φ (⋅) is
the standard normal distribution function. If pt is iidU(0,1), then zt is iid N (0,1). Under a
maintained hypothesis of normality, the joint null hypothesis of correct mean and variance
(‘goodness-of-fit’) and independence is tested against a first-order autoregressive alternative
with mean and variance possibly different from (0,1), via a likelihood ratio test with three
degrees of freedom.

Comparisons of forecast performance can be based on the logarithmic score, defined
for forecast density f jt as
log S j ( yt ) = log f jt ( yt ) .
To a Bayesian the logarithmic score is the logarithm of the predictive likelihood, and if two
forecasts are being compared, the log Bayes factor is the difference in their logarithmic

10

scores. If one of the forecasts is the ideal forecast, then the expected difference in their
logarithmic scores is the Kullback-Leibler information criterion (KLIC) or distance measure

{

}

KLIC jt = Eo log f ot ( yt ) − log f jt ( yt ) .
If the ideal forecast is known, as in a simulation experiment, competing forecasts can be
tested against it via their average logarithmic scores, using the transformed variables zt
(Mitchell and Hall, 2005). For density forecasts based on normal distributions we have
(Mitchell and Wallis, 2010), subscripting parameters appropriately,

(

2
⎛σ2 ⎞
μo − μ j
o ⎟ 1 σo
1
1
⎜
KLIC jt = − 2 − 2 log 2 + 2 2 +
⎜σ j ⎟
2σ 2j
σj
⎝
⎠

).
2

This has a minimum at zero: the sum of the first three terms on the right-hand side is nonnegative, as is the fourth term. Thus a positive KLIC may result from departures in mean
and/or variance in either direction, and additional investigation, via the PIT histogram, for
example, is needed to discover the direction of any departure. For example the competing
forecast may be too dispersed or not dispersed enough, indicated by a hump-shaped or Ushaped PIT histogram, respectively.

The relative performance of the two combination methods is assessed by adding the
logarithmic combination to the AR1, AR2 and linear combination forecasts that appear
(among others) in the simulation study of Mitchell and Wallis (2010), retaining all other
features of their experimental design, with 500 replications of samples of 150 observations.
The four pairs of values of the autoregressive parameters φ1 and φ2 used are shown, together
with the corresponding first- and second-order autocorrelation coefficients and the associated
values of the density forecast variances, in Table 1. Case (1) represents a relatively persistent
series, whereas case (2) exhibits rather less persistence than is observed in inflation and GDP
growth, for example: it is tending towards white noise, in which case all these forecasts
would be identical. The structure of case (3) is such that the AR1 forecast coincides with the
unconditional forecast, hence its variance is equal to the variance of the observed series,
while the AR2 forecast coincides with the ideal forecast, with variance equal to the
innovation variance. Case (4) represents a rather unusual oscillating form. It is seen that, in
all cases, σ G2 < σ C2 , as anticipated in the discussion following equation (11) above. The
difference is greatest in case (3), where the component variances are most unequal and the

11

Table 1. Simulation design and density forecast variances

Parameter

Case

φ1

φ2

(1)

1.5

(2)

Autocorrelation

Density forecast variance

ρ1

ρ2

σ12

σ 22

σ C2

σ G2

–0.6

0.94

0.81

1.56

4.52

3.40

2.32

0.15

0.2

0.19

0.23

1.04

1.02

1.05

1.03

(3)

0

0.95

0

0.95

10.26

1

7.94

1.82

(4)

–0.5

0.3

–0.71

0.66

1.10

1.27

1.34

1.18

Note: σ ε2 = 1 in all cases
expected disagreement term in equation (8) also contributes strongly to σ C2 . In cases (2) and
(4) σ C2 exceeds both the component variances, whereas σ G2 always lies between σ12 and σ 22 ,
of course.

For initial diagnostic checking we consider histograms of PIT values, to allow an
informal assessment of their uniformity and hence of the probabilistic calibration of the
forecasts. This is expected to hold for the two separate components of the combinations, that
is, the AR1 and AR2 forecasts, since each of these represents the correct conditional
distribution in respect of its normality and its first two moments conditional on the past data
being used. The results presented in Figure 1 entirely meet these expectations, with all the
histograms in the first two columns being essentially uniform. Despite this, the PIT
histograms for the combinations of these forecasts in the third and fourth columns show
departures from uniformity, most dramatically in cases (3) and (4). The histograms are
approximately symmetric but hump-shaped, thus the dominant effect is the increased
variance of these forecasts relative to the correct conditional forecast for the combined
information set: too few observations lie in the tails of these forecast densities. In the rows
with the greater departures from uniformity, comparison of the third and fourth columns
indicates that the logarithmic combination is performing better than the linear combination,
having a smaller variance and the correct distributional form, but the relative contributions of
these two factors are not distinguishable.

12

Table 2. Tests of complete calibration and forecast performance: rejection percentages at
nominal 5% level

Case (1)

Case (2)

Case (3)

Case (4)

Forecast

Bk

KLIC

Bk

KLIC

Bk

KLIC

Bk

KLIC

AR1

100

98

17

25

99

100

62

46

AR2

100

100

30

15

5.6

n.a.

97

93

Lin combn

100

100

14

10

100

100

62

55

Log combn

100

100

12

7

99

84

37

25

Note: Bk, the likelihood ratio test of Berkowitz (2001); KLIC, the test of KLIC differences
vs. the ideal forecast of Mitchell and Hall (2005)

The results of formal tests of complete calibration and forecast performance are
reported in Table 2. The AR1 and AR2 forecasts are probabilistically calibrated, as shown in
Figure 1, so the Berkowitz test is essentially a test of the independence of the zt s, and
indirectly a test of the independence of the pt s. It is seen that the test has good power: in case
(1), a relatively persistent series, there are no Type 2 errors in the 500 replications; the
rejection rate is smallest in case (2), which is closest to a white noise series. In case (3) the
AR2 forecast is the same as the ideal forecast, and the rejection rate is not significantly
different from the nominal size of the test. Otherwise the test gives a good indication that the
two individual forecasts do not satisfy complete calibration. The results of the KLIC-based
test of forecast performance against the ideal forecast give very much the same finding.

The combination forecasts satisfy neither probabilistic calibration nor independence,
and can be expected to be rejected against the ideal forecast. The main interest lies in the
possibility of discriminating between the linear and logarithmic combinations. In case (1), no
discrimination is possible, since there is no failure to reject either forecast using either test.
In the remaining cases the results favour the logarithmic combination, which is rejected less
frequently by either test than the linear combination. Finally, with respect to these measures
some gains from combining can be observed, with the logarithmic combination being
rejected less frequently than either of the two component forecasts in cases (2) and (4).

13

Discussion

The combination density forecasts in our example are constructed using equal weights,
whereas there is an emerging literature on the problem of estimating the weights in practice.
It seems to be agreed to base the weights on past forecast performance as measured by the
average logarithmic score, possibly allowing for time variation in the weights (Hall and
Mitchell, 2007; Geweke and Amisano, 2009; Jore, Mitchell and Vahey, 2010; Kascha and
Ravazzolo, 2010). The first three groups of authors only consider linear combinations,
whereas the last-named also include logarithmic combinations. Using the same performance
measure they find no clear ranking of the two forms of combination of the various (linear)
forecasting models of inflation they construct for four countries, but no information on their
comparative calibration characteristics is given. However a similar exercise conducted at the
same institution (Norges Bank), studying combinations of forecasting models for Norwegian
GDP growth and inflation, presents PIT histograms for linear and logarithmic pools
(Bjornland et al., 2009, Figures 15-18). For both variables the logarithmic combination
appears to be better calibrated, with the linear combination having too few observations in the
tails of the histograms, indicating excessive dispersion in the combined forecast densities, as
in our example above.

The weak statistical evidence favouring the logarithmic over the linear combination of
density forecasts may be augmented in practice by the advantages of a combined forecast that
retains the distributional form of its components. A committee of individual forecasters, each
producing a density forecast according to a given specification, and charged with producing a
composite forecast, will find it more convenient analytically and easier to communicate the
results if the composite forecast has the same form, which the logarithmic combination is
more likely to deliver. When the normal distribution is used, this applies exactly.

The result that a combination of two probabilistically calibrated density forecasts is
not itself probabilistically calibrated parallels the inefficiency of mean point forecasts
discussed in Section 2. In each case the component forecasts are the correct conditional
statements with respect to their specific information sets, but their combination, with respect
to the combined information set, is not. The same result also obtains for combinations of
event probability forecasts (Hora, 2004; Ranjan and Gneiting, 2010). In these broader

14

circumstances, it remains the case that ‘aggregating forecasts is not the same as aggregating
information sets’ (Granger, 1989, p.169), a remark that, like so many others of Clive
Granger’s, requires our continuing attention.

References

Barnard, G.A. (1963). New methods of quality control. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society A, 126, 255-258.
Bates, J.M. and Granger, C.W.J. (1969). The combination of forecasts. Operational
Research Quarterly, 20, 451-468.
Berkowitz, J. (2001). Testing density forecasts, with applications to risk management.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 19, 465-474.
Bjornland, H., Gerdrup, K., Jore, A.S., Smith, C. and Thorsrud, L.A. (2009). There is more
than one weight to skin a cat: combining densities at Norges Bank. Conference on
Forecasting and Monetary Policy, Deutsche Bundesbank, Berlin, March 2009.
Boero, G., Smith, J. and Wallis, K.F. (2008). Uncertainty and disagreement in economic
prediction: the Bank of England Survey of External Forecasters. Economic Journal,
118, 1107-1127.
Box, G.E.P and Jenkins, G.M. (1970). Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and Control. San
Francisco: Holden-Day
Clemen, R.T. (1989). Combining forecasts: a review and annotated bibliography.
International Journal of Forecasting, 5, 559-583.
Crowe, C. (2010). Consensus forecasts and inefficient information aggregation. Working
Paper No.10/178, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
Faria, A.E.and Mubwandarikwa, E. (2008). The geometric combination of Bayesian
forecasting models. Journal of Forecasting, 27, 519-535.
Faria, A.E. and Smith, J.Q. (1997). Conditionally externally Bayesian pooling operators in
chain graphs. Annals of Statistics, 25, 1740-1761.
Genest, C. and Zidek, J.V. (1986). Combining probability distributions: a critique and an
annotated bibliography (with discussion). Statistical Science, 1, 114-148.
Geweke, J. and Amisano, G. (2009). Optimal prediction pools. Working Paper No.1017,
European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Granger, C.W.J. (1969). Prediction with a generalized cost of error function. Operational
Research Quarterly, 20, 199-207.

15

Granger, C.W.J. (1989). Combining forecasts – twenty years later. Journal of Forecasting,
8, 167-173.
Hall, S.G. and Mitchell, J. (2007). Combining density forecasts. International Journal of
Forecasting, 23, 1-13.
Hora, S.C. (2004). Probability judgements for continuous quantities: linear combinations and
calibration. Management Science, 50, 597-604.
Jore, A.S., Mitchell, J. and Vahey, S.P. (2010). Combining forecast densities from VARs
with uncertain instabilities. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25, 621-634.
Kascha, C. and Ravazzolo, F. (2010). Combining inflation density forecasts. Journal of
Forecasting, 29, 231-250.
Kim, O., Lim, S.C. and Shaw, K.W. (2001). The inefficiency of the mean analyst forecast as
a summary forecast of earnings. Journal of Accounting Research, 39, 329-336.
Mitchell, J. and Hall, S.G. (2005). Evaluating, comparing and combining density forecasts
using the KLIC with an application to the Bank of England and NIESR ‘fan’ charts of
inflation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statisics, 67, 995-1033.
Mitchell, J. and Wallis, K.F. (2010). Evaluating density forecasts: forecast combinations,
model mixtures, calibration and sharpness. Journal of Applied Econometrics, in press.
Morris, S. and Shin, H.S. (2002). Social value of public information. American Economic
Review, 92, 1521-1534.
Pearson, K. (1894). Contributions to the mathematical theory of evolution. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, A, 185, 71-110.
Ranjan, R. and Gneiting, T. (2010). Combining probability forecasts. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society B, 72, 71-91.
Rich, R. and Tracy, J. (2010). The relationships among expected inflation, disagreement, and
uncertainty: evidence from matched point and density forecasts. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 92, 200-207.
Smith, J. and Wallis, K.F. (2009). A simple explanation of the forecast combination puzzle.
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 71, 331-355.
Wallis, K.F. (2005). Combining interval and density forecasts: a modest proposal. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 67, 983-994.
Winkler, R.L. (1968). The consensus of subjective probability distributions. Management
Science, 15, B61-B75.
Zarnowitz, V. (1969). The new ASA-NBER survey of forecasts by economic statisticians.
American Statistician, 23(1), 12-16.

16

Figure 1. PIT histograms for the autoregressive example. Rows: cases (1)-(4) as

defined in Table 1. Columns: forecasts, respectively AR1, AR2, their linear
combination and their logarithmic combination

17

